Bergenroth, CSP Spain vol. 2 (1866) nos. 636-638, pp. 618-620, from british-history.ac.uk (copy in targets/sanchez1523/csp/pp614-626.htm).
636 = triplicate of the 14 Apr 1524 despatch (Gayangos MS, contemporary deciphering); 637 = R9873 (A.31 f.79); 638 = secretary's abstract with Gattinara's notes (A.33 f.167).

14 April. M. D. Pasc. d. G. Pa. r. a. l. Hist. d. Esp. 636. The Duke Of Sessa, Imperial Ambassador in Rome, to the Emperor. Ecclesiastical affairs. Has told the Pope what he (the Emperor) has written to him about the breaking up of his army in Navarra. It was already known in Rome that he had disbanded his troops, and it is added that he intends to hold cortes in Burgos, Aragon, and Catalonia, and with the money which will be granted to him to come to Italy. That idea is not liked in Rome. The Archbishop of Capua left Blois on the 7th of April, with a project of a treaty of truce. Has insisted that he should go from France to England. His reasons for doing so were twofold, viz., in the first place, he thought that it would be more becoming his (the Emperor's) high station if the Archbishop were to go to him accompanied by an English ambassador ; secondly, he was of opinion that the treaty should be so arranged that the King of France should bind himself towards the King of England to pay him the wonted pensions during the time of the truce. Thinks the peace could be concluded more easily if the Pope were to propose it. Does not know whether it is because it is understood in Rome that he and the King of England are badly prepared for a war, but it is a fact, that at the Papal court many difficulties are made, and conditions proposed which could scarcely be accepted by him. Does what he can to persuade the Pope to take another view of the state of things. Viceroy of Naples, &c. The Pope sent 4,000 ducats to the army. The money was intercepted in Lodi. The Pope will send 8,000 ducats instead. Florence, &c. Letters from the Papal nuncio in England, dated the 26th of March, state that the King of England is not at all prepared to go to war with France, and that the English are waiting to see what he (the Emperor) will do. The Cardinal of England declared to the nuncio that if the King of France would send an ambassador and propose a truce or a peace under some honest colour, he would be favourably received by King Henry. The Cardinal wishes only to avoid the appearance of himself proposing the peace with France, because, he says, that would injure his reputation. The [Page 619] English declare that they will not contribute anything for the Italian war. The letters which he (the Duke of Sessa) has received from Madame Margaret confirm this news. Begs him to take care that his reputation does not suffer whether he continues the war or makes peace. This is even the more necessary in order to preserve his friends than in order to intimidate his enemies. News concerning the army, church preferment, &c., &c.— Rome, the 14th of April 1524. Addressed : "To the most sacred and victorious Cœsar, King of Spain, &c., our sovereign Lord." Triplicate . Indorsed : "To the King. 1524. Rome. Duke of Sessa. The 14th and 15th of April. Answered." Spanish. Holograph, partly in cipher. Contemporary deciphering. pp . 13.

14 April. M. Re. Ac. d. Hist. Salazar. A. 31. f. 79. 637. The Duke Of Sessa, Imperial Ambassador in Rome, to the Emperor. This despatch in cipher has been deciphered by Don Manuel de Goicoechea, Keeper of the Archives of the Royal Academy of History in Madrid. It is in all essential parts identical with the preceding despatch of the same date. The small alterations are given in the following abstract, which also contains the marginal notes of the Chancellor Gattinara. Spanish. Autograph in cipher. pp . 8.

14 April. M. Re. Ac. d. Hist. Salazar. A. 33. f. 167. 638. The Duke Of Sessa, Imperial Ambassador in Rome, to the Emperor. Victory of Fuentarabia. Monsieur de Beaurain has arrived, and congratulated the Pope in his (the Emperor's) name. Viceroy of Naples. Monastery of Santa Cruz in Segovia, &c. The Duke of Sessa told the Pope all he had been ordered to say to him respecting the disbanding of his army. The Pope, however, persists in his objections. [ Written on the margin in the hand of the Chancellor Gattinara : ] It is impossible to prevent people from thinking and saying what seems best to them. The Archbishop of Capua, however, knows the intention and power of his Majesty. The articles of the truce will furnish the Duke (of Sessa) with material for his answer (to the Pope). The Duke (of Sessa) asked the Pope to send the Archbishop of Capua from France to England, and afterwards to Spain. His reasons for doing so were that he thought that it was more honourable for the Emperor that the conditions [Page 620] of the truce should first be discussed between the Kings of France and England, and afterwards presented to the Emperor for his approval. Another reason that the Duke gave was that he wished the King of France to bind himself towards the King of England to pay him the wonted pensions during the period of the truce. As soon as that was done, the Archbishop of Capua should go to Spain, accompanied by English and French ambassadors, and there conclude the treaty in the presence of the Emperor. Nothing of all this, however, has been done. The Pope wishes to avoid all difficulties with France, believing that neither the Emperor nor the King of England are prepared to continue the war. [ Written on the margin by the Chancellor Gattinara : ] No answer. Viceroy of Naples. Cardinal of Cortona, &c. The Pope has received letters from England, dated the 26th of March. According to them, the English show little inclination to continue the war. They wait to see what the Emperor will do. The Cardinal of England told the nuncio that, if the Pope could persuade the King of France to send some person with acceptable proposals of a truce to England, his offer would be accepted. The English absolutely refuse to contribute anything for the war in Italy. Madame Margaret has written the same news. [ Written on the margin in the hand of the Chancellor Gattinara : ] His Majesty has no doubt that after the victory and the invasion of France by Bourbon, the King of England will change his mind, and send an army to invade France. The King of England had promised it already before the victory, on condition that the army of Bourbon was to be maintained by his Majesty. His Majesty now sends one of his gentlemen in waiting to England with very good instructions, asking the King of England to hasten as much as possible his invasion of France. The Duke of Sessa thinks that, in concluding the truce, he (the Emperor) must take particular care of his honour. If he does so, it will be easy for him afterwards to find allies. [ Written on the margin in the hand of the Chancellor Gattinara : ] Very well said, and so it will be done, as he will hear from Monsieur de la Roche. The bull of Pope Adrian, &c., &c. Superscribed : "To the King. The Duke of Sessa. The 14th of April 1524." Spanish. Abstract made by one of the secretaries of the Emperor. The marginal notes are holograph. pp . 8. 
